+++

title = 'The Monad Symphony: Crafting a Functionally Pure Parser for λ.c'

date = 2023-10-07T23:06:36+02:00

draft = false

author = 'Denis Chevalier'

description = 'Delving into the architecture of the parser'

tags = ['compiler','project','status','parser']

categories = ['status', 'blog']

series = ['Project Advencement']

+++

## Introduction

Welcome back to another entrancing episode in the λ.c saga. In our prior
installments, we delved into the mystical realms of untyped lambda calculus,
wrestled with the intricacies of lexing, and even touched on the philosophical
harmonic convergence between music and programming. Today, we progress to the
next logical chapter: the architecture of our parser, accentuated by the
elegance of monads and functional purity.

In today's installment, we’ll delve into the architecture of our parser,
accentuated by the elegance of monads and functional purity. Expect insights
into functional programming, Go-specific challenges, and how these paradigms
intersect in the development of λ.c.

## The Elegance of Functional Purity

Functional purity is not merely a technical strategy; it's an ideology. By
ensuring that functions have no side effects and always produce the same output
for the same input, we encapsulate complexity, increase robustness, and make the
code more understandable. This purity harmonizes well with both the mathematical
beauty of lambda calculus and the elegant architectures found in music
composition.

## Monad-Driven Architecture: Why and How

### Why Monads?

In the quest for a robust and flexible parser, the allure of monads proved
irresistible. Monads, derived from category theory, offer a compelling
abstraction for modeling computations instead of data. The monadic design
pattern enables better separation of concerns, making the codebase more modular,
maintainable, and extensible. Moreover, it simplifies error handling and allows
for more semantic and meaningful code.

### The Engineering Challenge in Go

While Go is an exceptionally practical language, it does not naturally lend
itself to monadic or pure functional paradigms. However, as is often said, where
there's a will, there's a way. Go's robust type system and interfaces provide
just enough leeway to implement monads in an idiomatic manner. And for the
enthusiastic among you, the complete monad implementation is available at
[denisdubochevalier/monad](https://github.com/denisdubochevalier/monad).

### Core Function Signature and Monadization

```go
func Parse(state State) monad.Result[ASTNode, error] {
    // Default status
	val := monad.Fail[ASTNode, error](fmt.Errorf("empty token list"))

    // Iterate on the state
	for !state.done() {
	    // Use a state monad to encapsulate the parser's state
		val, state = monad.NewState[State, monad.Result[ASTNode, error]](
			eofParser,
		).Run(state)
	}

	return val
}
```

Here, `monad.Result[ASTNode, error]` captures the duality of parsing: the
resultant AST node and any potential errors. The monad encapsulates both the
triumphs and tribulations inherent in the parsing process. Furthermore,
`monad.State[State, monad.Result[ASTNode, error]]` wraps the parser's state in a
functionally pure, immutable shell, enabling transformative operations that are
free from side-effects.

## The Nuances of Monadization in Go

In embracing monads, one must grapple with a few peculiarities unique to Go,
such as the absence of type hierarchy or sum types. Additionally, Go's
concurrency model, while powerful, introduces subtleties that require careful
consideration when striving for functional purity.

## Monad Harmony: How it Fits with the Lexer

In a previous post, we achieved a milestone of 100% test coverage for our lexer.
This robustness forms a symphonic partnership with our functionally pure parser.
While the lexer reliably tokenizes input into digestible pieces, the parser,
with its monadic architecture, constructs a syntactic narrative that is both
resilient and transparent.

To visualize this symphonic partnership, consider the following simplified
interaction:

```go
code := ... // Read source code file

// Create lexer
l := lexer.New().WithContent(code)

// Store
tokens := []lexer.Token

// While we are not at EOF
for {
    token := monad.None[lexer.Token]()
    // Lex the next token
    token, l = l.Next()
    if token.isNothing() {
        continue
    }

    // Append the token to the list of tokens
    tokens = append(tokens, token)

    if token.Value().Type() == lexer.EOF {
        break
    }
}

// Create an AST from the tokens list
ast, err := parser.Parse(tokens)

// Do something with the AST
```

Here, the lexer reliably tokenizes the input, providing a robust foundation for
the monadic parser to construct an abstract syntax tree.

## Looking Ahead: The Future Conduct of λ.c

As we build upon this monad-driven architecture, we plan to explore
optimizations, and perhaps most excitingly, code generation strategies that
leverage the very functional purity we've imbued into the parser.

## Join the Orchestra: Open Invitations for Contributions

We invite you, the reader, to join this intellectual symphony. Whether your
expertise lies in Go, lambda calculus, or even the art of crafting tests,
there's a role for you in the development of λ.c.

We welcome contributions in areas such as refining the monadic architecture,
enhancing test coverage, and theoretical explorations into the lambda calculus.
Feel free to fork the repository or join the discussions on our issues page.

## Encore: A Glimpse of What’s Next

Stay tuned for our next installment where we'll delve into the intricate details
of implementing the parser for λ.c. We'll explore the architectural decisions,
the challenges overcome, and the breakthroughs that have shaped its development.
